Conclusion
==========

Integrated spatial decision support frameworks should maximize use of
all available species data, utilize the best available environmental
predictors, handle inherent uncertainty in model results, and
transparently manage trade-offs between conservation and industry.

Military exercises require environmental impact assessment in relation
to cetaceans (Dolman et al. 2009). More recently, facilities for
offshore renewable energies, such as wind and wave, pose another
potential impact on cetaceans (Dolman and Simmonds 2010). All of these
human activities, which continue to be on the rise, have been
prioritized for systematic planning under the auspices of “ocean zoning”
(Crowder et al. 2006; Halpern, McLeod, et al. 2008) or “marine spatial
planning” (Douvere 2008) by the United States (Lubchenco and Sutley
2010) and internationally (Ardron et al. 2008; Dahl et al. 2009). In
order to best plan for such activities, there will be a continuing need
to improve our models.

I have data and much of the analysis already completed for all of the
above with several collaborators. The conservation climate is ripe for
application of these analysis to real world scenarios. The US Navy is
responding to lawsuits by the Environmental Defense Fund over whale
strandings from use of low-frequency sonar. In British Columbia, the
largest oil pipeline in Canada is terminating at port Kittimat where
heavy oil tankers will traffic waters rich in wildlife not too far in
memory or geography from the Valdez disaster. Renewable energies are on
the rise, with offshore development most recently highlighted by a
Google investment of \$5 billion for an offshore wind backbone in the US
East coast. These marine developments are now part of a presidential
mandate to address marine spatial planning in the US outlined by the
Ocean Task Force. The Global Ocean Biodiversity Initiative is now in
process through United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity to
address pelagic conservation strategies. These projects further fit into
actively funded and proposed projects in the Halpin Marine Geospatial
Ecology Lab: 1) NASA funded SDSS for Integrating Ocean Observing Data to
Enhance Protected Species, 2) NASA proposed Forecasting of climate
change and its effect on the abundance and distribution of cetaceans
using downscaled output of IPCC class earth system models, and 3) Census
funded Global Ocean Biodiversity Initiative.

References
==========
